Add support for topology-aware traffic routing (#7191)
gardener/gardener: docs/usage/topology_aware_routing.md

> # Topology-aware Traffic Routing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Topology-Aware Traffic Routing
```

The `TopologyAwareRouting` feature enables topology-aware traffic routing for components in the garden or seed clusters.

## Motivation

> The enablement of [highly available Shoot control planes](shoot_high_availability.md) requires multi-zone Seed clusters. Garden cluster can also be a multi-zone cluster. The topology-aware routing is introduced to reduce costs and to improve network performance for the cross availability zone traffic. The cross availability zone traffic is charged by the cloud providers and it comes with higher latency compared to the traffic within the same zone. The `TopologyAwareRouting` feature enables topology-aware routing for Services deployed in the garden or seed clusters. For the clients consuming these topology-aware Services, kube-proxy prefers the endpoints which are within the same zone.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The enablement of [highly available Shoot control planes](shoot_high_availability.md) requires multi-zone Seed clusters. A Garden cluster can also be a multi-zone cluster. The topology-aware routing is introduced to reduce costs and to improve network performance for the cross availability zone traffic. The cross availability zone traffic is charged by the cloud providers and it comes with higher latency compared to the traffic within the same zone. The `TopologyAwareRouting` feature enables topology-aware routing for Services deployed in the garden or seed clusters. For the clients consuming these topology-aware Services, kube-proxy prefers the endpoints which are within the same zone.
```

> ## How it works?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## How it works
```

or
```suggestion
## How does it work?
```

The `TopologyAwareRouting` feature relies on the Kubernetes feature [`TopologyAwareHints`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/topology-aware-hints/).

> ##### EndpointSlice Hints mutating webhook

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### EndpointSlice Hints Mutating Webhook
```

- The algorithm in the EndpointSlice controller is based on a CPU-balance heuristic. From the TopologyAwareHints documentation:
   > The controller allocates a proportional amount of endpoints to each zone. This proportion is based on the allocatable CPU cores for nodes running in that zone. For example, if one zone had 2 CPU cores and another zone only had 1 CPU core, the controller would allocate twice as many endpoints to the zone with 2 CPU cores.

   In case it is not possible to achieve a balanced distribution of the endpoints, as a safeguard mechanism the controller removes hints from the EndpointSlice resource.

>    In our setup the clients and the servers are well-known and usually the traffic a component receives does not depend on the zone's allocatable CPU. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   In our setup, the clients and the servers are well-known and usually the traffic a component receives does not depend on the zone's allocatable CPU. 
```

   In case it is not possible to achieve a balanced distribution of the endpoints, as a safeguard mechanism the controller removes hints from the EndpointSlice resource.
   In our setup the clients and the servers are well-known and usually the traffic a component receives does not depend on the zone's allocatable CPU. 

>    Most of the components deployed by Gardener are scaled automatically by VPA (in most of the cases). In case of an overload of a replica, the VPA should provide and apply enhanced CPU and memory resources. Additionally, Gardener uses the cluster-autoscaler to upscale/downscale Nodes dynamically. Hence, it is not possible to ensure a balanced of allocatable CPU accross the zones.

Reviewer 3: Nit
```suggestion
   Most of the components deployed by Gardener are scaled automatically by VPA (in most of the cases). In case of an overload of a replica, the VPA should provide and apply enhanced CPU and memory resources. Additionally, Gardener uses the cluster-autoscaler to upscale/downscale Nodes dynamically. Hence, it is not possible to ensure a balanced allocatable CPU across the zones.
```

>    Most of the components deployed by Gardener are scaled automatically by VPA (in most of the cases). In case of an overload of a replica, the VPA should provide and apply enhanced CPU and memory resources. Additionally, Gardener uses the cluster-autoscaler to upscale/downscale Nodes dynamically. Hence, it is not possible to ensure a balanced of allocatable CPU accross the zones.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Many components deployed by Gardener are scaled automatically by VPA. In case of an overloaded replica, the VPA should provide and apply enhanced CPU and memory resources. Additionally, Gardener uses the cluster-autoscaler to upscale/downscale Nodes dynamically. Hence, it is not possible to ensure a balanced allocatable CPU across the zones.
```

>    Most of the components deployed by Gardener are scaled automatically by VPA (in most of the cases). In case of an overload of a replica, the VPA should provide and apply enhanced CPU and memory resources. Additionally, Gardener uses the cluster-autoscaler to upscale/downscale Nodes dynamically. Hence, it is not possible to ensure a balanced of allocatable CPU accross the zones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Most of the components deployed by Gardener are scaled automatically by VPA. In case of an overload of a replica, the VPA should provide and apply enhanced CPU and memory resources. Additionally, Gardener uses the cluster-autoscaler to upscale/downscale Nodes dynamically. Hence, it is not possible to ensure a balanced of allocatable CPU accross the zones.
```

> - TopologyAwareHints does not work at low-endpoint counts. It falls apart for a Service with less than 10 Endpoints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- TopologyAwareHints do not work at low-endpoint counts. They fall apart for a Service with less than 10 Endpoints.
```

- TopologyAwareHints does not work at low-endpoint counts.

> - Hints provided by the EndpointSlice controller are not deterministic. With cluster-autoscaler running and load increasing in the next moment hints can be removed. There is no option to enforce the zone-level topology.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Hints provided by the EndpointSlice controller are not deterministic. With cluster-autoscaler running and load increasing, hints can be removed in the next moment. There is no option to enforce the zone-level topology.
```

For more details, see the following issue [kubernetes/kubernetes#113731](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/113731).

> To circumvent these issues with the EndpointSlice controller, a mutating webhook in the resource-manager assigns hints to EndpointSlice resources. For each enpoint in the EndpointSlice it sets the endpoint's hints to the endpoint's zone. The webhook overwrites the hints provided by the EndpointSlice controller in kube-controller-manager. For more details, see the [webhook's documentation](../concepts/resource-manager.md#endpointslice-hints).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To circumvent these issues with the EndpointSlice controller, a mutating webhook in the resource-manager assigns hints to EndpointSlice resources. For each endpoint in the EndpointSlice, it sets the endpoint's hints to the endpoint's zone. The webhook overwrites the hints provided by the EndpointSlice controller in kube-controller-manager. For more details, see the [webhook's documentation](../concepts/resource-manager.md#endpointslice-hints).
```

> To circumvent these issues with the EndpointSlice controller, a mutating webhook in the resource-manager assigns hints to EndpointSlice resources. For each enpoint in the EndpointSlice it sets the endpoint's hints to the endpoint's zone. The webhook overwrites the hints provided by the EndpointSlice controller in kube-controller-manager. For more details, see the [webhook's documentation](../concepts/resource-manager.md#endpointslice-hints).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To circumvent these issues with the EndpointSlice controller, a mutating webhook in the gardener-resource-manager assigns hints to EndpointSlice resources. For each enpoint in the EndpointSlice it sets the endpoint's hints to the endpoint's zone. The webhook overwrites the hints provided by the EndpointSlice controller in kube-controller-manager. For more details, see the [webhook's documentation](../concepts/resource-manager.md#endpointslice-hints).
```

##### kube-proxy

> By default, with kube-proxy running in `iptables` mode traffic is distributed randomly across all endpoints, regardless of where it originates from. In a 3 zone cluster, traffic is more likely to go to another zone than to stay in the current zone.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By default, with kube-proxy running in `iptables` mode traffic is distributed randomly across all endpoints, regardless of where it originates from. In a 3-zone cluster, traffic is more likely to go to another zone than to stay in the current zone.
```

> By default, with kube-proxy running in `iptables` mode traffic is distributed randomly across all endpoints, regardless of where it originates from. In a 3 zone cluster, traffic is more likely to go to another zone than to stay in the current zone.

Reviewer 2: Q: Does this also work with `IPVS`? If not then we'd have a dependency to how Kube-Proxy in the garden/seed cluster should be configured.

Author: Can you elaborate in more details what you mean for `IPVS`?

This sentence tries to explain that in `iptables` mode traffic is distributed randomly across all endpoints, hence the traffic is not zone/topology aware. I don't know what is the used algorithm in `ipvs` mode but I doubt that it is zone/topology aware. Still, it makes sense to check it to be 100% sure.

Reviewer 2: Okay, thanks for making it clear. Seems like I misunderstood this section 🙂

> By default, with kube-proxy running in `iptables` mode traffic is distributed randomly across all endpoints, regardless of where it originates from. In a 3 zone cluster, traffic is more likely to go to another zone than to stay in the current zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, with kube-proxy running in `iptables` mode, traffic is distributed randomly across all endpoints, regardless of where it originates from. In a 3 zone cluster, traffic is more likely to go to another zone than to stay in the current zone.
```

> With the `TopologyAwareRouting` feature kube-proxy filters the endpoints it routes to based on the hints in the EndpointSlice resource. In most of the cases, kube-proxy will prefer the endpoint(s) in the same zone. For more details, see the [following section](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/topology-aware-hints/#implementation-kube-proxy).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the `TopologyAwareRouting` feature, kube-proxy filters the endpoints it routes to based on the hints in the EndpointSlice resource. In most of the cases, kube-proxy will prefer the endpoint(s) in the same zone. For more details, see the [following section](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/topology-aware-hints/#implementation-kube-proxy).
```

## Topology-aware Services in the Seed cluster

##### etcd-main-client and etcd-events-client

The `etcd-main-client` and `etcd-events-client` Services are topology-aware. They are consumed by the kube-apiserver.

##### kube-apiserver

The `kube-apiserver` Service is topology-aware. It is consumed by the controllers running in the Shoot control plane.

##### gardener-resource-manager

The `gardener-resource-manager` Service that is part of the Shoot control plane is topology-aware. The resource-manager serves webhooks and the Service is consumed by the kube-apiserver for the webhook communication.

##### vpa-webhook

The `vpa-webhook` Service that is part of the Shoot control plane is topology-aware. It is consumed by the kube-apiserver for the webhook communication.

## Topology-aware Services in the Garden cluster

> TBD

Reviewer: Why are the same ETCD/KAPI/GRM services not included here?

Author: I decided to delay the gardener-operator/Garden cluster handling for a follow-up PR. If you have suggestions which Services are eligible to be topology-aware there, feel free to add these suggestions in https://github.com/gardener/gardener/issues/6718.
For this PR will remove the feature gate from the gardener-operator.

Author: The gardener-operator feature gate is now removed from this PR.

## How to make a Service topology-aware?

> To make a Service topology-aware the following annotation and label has to be added to the Service:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make a Service topology-aware, the following annotation and label has to be added to the Service:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  annotations:

>     service.kubernetes.io/topology-aware-hints: "auto"

Reviewer 2: Can you explain in the doc why this annotation is needed (for Kube-Proxy?)

Author: Yes, `service.kubernetes.io/topology-aware-hints="auto"` is needed for kube-proxy to make kube-proxy use the proper topology-aware endpoint. See https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/b46a3f887ca979b1a5d14fd39cb1af43e7e5d12d/pkg/proxy/topology.go#L140-L186.

I will elaborate this in the doc. Good point!

  labels:

>     endpoint-slice-hints.resources.gardener.cloud/consider: "true"

Reviewer 3: Is there a reason to use label and annotation combination, can we not use only annotation or only labels? Or is this coming from Kubernetes side?

Author: As described in https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/7191#discussion_r1081179150, the `service.kubernetes.io/topology-aware-hints="auto"` annotation is needed for kube-proxy. The `endpoint-slice-hints.resources.gardener.cloud/consider="true" label is needed for GRM's EndpointSlice hints mutating webhook to select only the EndpointSlice resources with the consider label and not all the EndpointSlice resources in the cluster.
I added few sentences to clarify this.

```

> The Gardener extensions can use this approach.

Reviewer 2: You could mention this [here](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/extensions/conventions.md#high-availability-of-deployed-components) as well.

> 1. The Pods backing the Service should be spread on most of the availabel zones. This constraint should be ensured with appropriate scheduling constraints (Pod topology spread constraints, Pod (anti-)affinity). Enabling the feature for a Service with a single backing Pod or Pods all located in the same zone does not lead to a benefit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The Pods backing the Service should be spread on most of the available zones. This constraint should be ensured with appropriate scheduling constraints (topology spread constraints, (anti-)affinity). Enabling the feature for a Service with a single backing Pod or Pods all located in the same zone does not lead to a benefit.
```

## How to enable the `TopologyAwareRouting` feature gate?

The `TopologyAwareRouting` feature gate can be enabled in the component config of the corresponding component. For gardenlet:

```yaml
apiVersion: gardenlet.config.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: GardenletConfiguration
# ...
featureGates:
  TopologyAwareRouting: true
```

> For the garden-operator:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the gardener-operator:

```

> 1. The component should be scaled up by `VerticalPodAutoscaler`. In case of an overload (a large portion of the of the traffic is originating from a given zone) the `VerticalPodAutoscaler` should provide better resource recommendations for the overloaded backing Pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The component should be scaled up by `VerticalPodAutoscaler`. In case of an overload (a large portion of the of the traffic is originating from a given zone), the `VerticalPodAutoscaler` should provide better resource recommendations for the overloaded backing Pods.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.config.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: OperatorConfiguration
# ...
featureGates:
  TopologyAwareRouting: true
```

> > For K8s < 1.24 clusters the `TopologyAwareRouting` feature gate requires the Kubernetes `TopologyAwareHints` feature to be enabled for kube-apiserver, kube-controller-manager and kube-proxy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> For K8s < 1.24 clusters, the `TopologyAwareRouting` feature gate requires the Kubernetes `TopologyAwareHints` feature to be enabled for kube-apiserver, kube-controller-manager and kube-proxy.
```

Why? Is it disabled by default? If yes maybe add this here for transparency.

Author: This is required because the `TopologyAwareHints` feature gate is disabled by default in K8s < 1.24. When the `TopologyAwareHints` feature gate is disabled the kube-apiserver does not allow anything to be persisted in the `.endpoints[].hints` field in the EndpointSlice resource (see https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/3e26e104bdf9d0dc3c4046d6350b93557c67f3f4/pkg/registry/discovery/endpointslice/strategy.go#L124-L157), the kube-controller-manager removes the hints and kube-proxy is not using topology-aware routing (see https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/b46a3f887ca979b1a5d14fd39cb1af43e7e5d12d/pkg/proxy/topology.go#L140-L186).
I will elaborate this in the doc.

> The `kube-apiserver` Service is topology-aware. It is consumed by the controllers running in the Shoot control plane.

Author: @ScheererJ , with @acumino and @shafeeqes we also wanted to add details about the istio-ingressgateway and whether istio-ingressgateway Pod routes always traffic to the kube-apiserver Pods in the same zone. IIRC, this is achieved/completed with https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/6653, right?
I guess we can also link https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/d783576ff566ab994068817962ed734d430f6187/docs/usage/istio.md#L33. There, in the diagram how we make sure that an external traffic for non-HA Shoot (`shoot-1`) is routed to the LB of the zone-specific istio-ingressgateway? Similarly, how we make sure that an external traffic for HA shoot (`shoot-ha`) is routed to the default istio-ingressgateway (that is spread on all zones)?

Author: I added the following note:

> Note: The `istio-ingressgateway` component routes traffic in topology-aware manner - if possible, it routes traffic to the target `kube-apiserver` Pods in the same zone. If there is no healthy `kube-apiserver` Pod available in the same zone, the traffic is routed to any of the healthy Pods in the other zones. This behaviour is unconditionally enabled.

Reviewer 4: Yes, indeed https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/6653 took care of the cluster-internal traffic being kept within the same zone (if possible). https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/6997 implemented the externally visible part, i.e. if a cluster control plane is available in multiple availability zones it should also be accessible via multiple availability zones and if a cluster control plane is only single-zonal it should only be exposed via a load balancer in that availability zone. As the domain names of the clusters are mapped to the corresponding load balancer IP addresses we ensure that everything works as expected.

Author: Thanks for confirming and explaining!

> ## How to enable the topology-aware routing?

Author: I have to add a reference to this document and section from `docs/usage/seed_settings.md`.

> ⚠️ For K8s < 1.24 clusters, the topology-aware routing setting requires the Kubernetes `TopologyAwareHints` feature gate to be enabled for kube-apiserver, kube-controller-manager and kube-proxy. This is required because the `TopologyAwareHints` feature gate is disabled by default in K8s < 1.24. When `TopologyAwareHints` is disabled the kube-apiserver does not allow anything to be persisted in the `.endpoints[].hints` field in the EndpointSlice resource, the kube-controller-manager removes the hints and kube-proxy is not using topology-aware routing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
⚠️ For K8s < 1.24 clusters, the topology-aware routing setting requires the Kubernetes `TopologyAwareHints` feature gate to be enabled for kube-apiserver, kube-controller-manager and kube-proxy. This is required because the `TopologyAwareHints` feature gate is disabled by default in K8s < 1.24. When `TopologyAwareHints` is disabled, the kube-apiserver does not allow anything to be persisted in the `.endpoints[].hints` field in the EndpointSlice resource. Also, the kube-controller-manager removes the hints, hence kube-proxy is not using topology-aware routing.
```

# Topology-Aware Traffic Routing

The `TopologyAwareRouting` feature enables topology-aware traffic routing for components in the garden or seed clusters.

## Motivation

> The enablement of [highly available Shoot control planes](shoot_high_availability.md) requires multi-zone Seed clusters. A Garden cluster can also be a multi-zone cluster. The topology-aware routing is introduced to reduce costs and to improve network performance for the cross availability zone traffic. The cross availability zone traffic is charged by the cloud providers and it comes with higher latency compared to the traffic within the same zone. The `TopologyAwareRouting` feature enables topology-aware routing for Services deployed in the garden or seed clusters. For the clients consuming these topology-aware Services, kube-proxy prefers the endpoints which are within the same zone.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The enablement of [highly available shoot control-planes](shoot_high_availability.md) requires multi-zone seed clusters. A garden cluster can also be a multi-zone cluster. The topology-aware routing is introduced to reduce costs and to improve network performance for the cross availability zone traffic. The cross availability zone traffic is charged by the cloud providers and it comes with higher latency compared to the traffic within the same zone. The `TopologyAwareRouting` feature enables topology-aware routing for `Service`s deployed in the garden or seed clusters. For the clients consuming these topology-aware services, `kube-proxy` prefers the endpoints which are within the same zone.
```

Author: I cannot follow which one should be used consistently
"Shoot" vs "shoot"
"Seed" vs "seed"
"Garden cluster" vs "garden cluster"
"`Services`s" vs "Services" vs "services"
...

@n-boshnakov maybe you can write this down as general rule and make efforts that the rules are then enforced/applied.

Reviewer: Achieving consistency for this is hard, and writing it down will probably not fix this problem since it depends on the context. To me, it depends on the context - when talking about a Kubernetes resource or object, I use `Shoot`(s), but when it's not directly related to such concrete resource then I use "shoot cluster". Not sure if this can be enforced correctly via some static checks.
Anyways, that's why we have such PR reviews. Will you make the change?

Author: I already made the change locally.
I am saying that we are missing guidelines for the above questions. See https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#use-upper-camel-case-for-api-objects. My understanding is that "Shoot" should be used over "shoot" no matter the context.

Reviewer: 🤷‍♂️

Reviewer 5: As Rafael said, achieving consistency for the terminology across the whole repository will be hard, not to mention the websites where content coming from different repositories needs to be taken into account.

Currently I am working on proofreading all of the topics in the gardener/gardener repository, and trying to keep the terminology consistent on a per-topic basis. Achieving consistency across the whole repository would perhaps be a task for after that, combining in it changes to the [Contributors Guide](https://github.com/gardener/documentation/blob/master/website/documentation/contribute/_index.md) as well as the [Glossary](https://github.tools.sap/kubernetes/documentation/blob/master/website/documentation/090-resources/050-glossary/_index.md).

> The enablement of [highly available Shoot control planes](shoot_high_availability.md) requires multi-zone Seed clusters. A Garden cluster can also be a multi-zone cluster. The topology-aware routing is introduced to reduce costs and to improve network performance for the cross availability zone traffic. The cross availability zone traffic is charged by the cloud providers and it comes with higher latency compared to the traffic within the same zone. The `TopologyAwareRouting` feature enables topology-aware routing for Services deployed in the garden or seed clusters. For the clients consuming these topology-aware Services, kube-proxy prefers the endpoints which are within the same zone.

Reviewer 4: I am a bit puzzled by the sentence `The topology-aware routing is introduced to reduce costs and to improve network performance for the cross availability zone traffic.`
Topology-aware routing may reduce costs and improve network performance by omitting/preventing cross-zonal traffic if possible.
I suppose you mean the same thing, but I had trouble understanding it like that.

Author: Valid point. The wording should be improved with the latest commit.

- The algorithm in the EndpointSlice controller is based on a CPU-balance heuristic. From the TopologyAwareHints documentation:
   > The controller allocates a proportional amount of endpoints to each zone. This proportion is based on the allocatable CPU cores for nodes running in that zone. For example, if one zone had 2 CPU cores and another zone only had 1 CPU core, the controller would allocate twice as many endpoints to the zone with 2 CPU cores.

   In case it is not possible to achieve a balanced distribution of the endpoints, as a safeguard mechanism the controller removes hints from the EndpointSlice resource.
   In our setup the clients and the servers are well-known and usually the traffic a component receives does not depend on the zone's allocatable CPU. 
   Many components deployed by Gardener are scaled automatically by VPA. In case of an overload of a replica, the VPA should provide and apply enhanced CPU and memory resources. Additionally, Gardener uses the cluster-autoscaler to upscale/downscale Nodes dynamically. Hence, it is not possible to ensure a balanced allocatable CPU across the zones.

> - TopologyAwareHints does not work at low-endpoint counts.

Reviewer 4: It might help to put a number to it and compare it to our deployments of importance, e.g. `kube-apiserver`.

Author: According to https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3293#issuecomment-1322031359 low-endpoint count is < 10. It will be added with the latest commit.

- Hints provided by the EndpointSlice controller are not deterministic. With cluster-autoscaler running and load increasing, hints can be removed in the next moment. There is no option to enforce the zone-level topology.

For more details, see the following issue [kubernetes/kubernetes#113731](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/113731).

> To circumvent these issues with the EndpointSlice controller, a mutating webhook in the gardener-resource-manager assigns hints to EndpointSlice resources. For each endpoint in the EndpointSlice it sets the endpoint's hints to the endpoint's zone. The webhook overwrites the hints provided by the EndpointSlice controller in kube-controller-manager. For more details, see the [webhook's documentation](../concepts/resource-manager.md#endpointslice-hints).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To circumvent these issues with the EndpointSlice controller, a mutating webhook in the gardener-resource-manager assigns hints to EndpointSlice resources. For each endpoint in the EndpointSlice, it sets the endpoint's hints to the endpoint's zone. The webhook overwrites the hints provided by the EndpointSlice controller in kube-controller-manager. For more details, see the [webhook's documentation](../concepts/resource-manager.md#endpointslice-hints).
```

##### kube-proxy

By default, with kube-proxy running in `iptables` mode, traffic is distributed randomly across all endpoints, regardless of where it originates from. In a cluster with 3 zones, traffic is more likely to go to another zone than to stay in the current zone.

> With the `TopologyAwareRouting` feature, kube-proxy filters the endpoints it routes to based on the hints in the EndpointSlice resource. In most of the cases, kube-proxy will prefer the endpoint(s) in the same zone. For more details, see the [following section](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/topology-aware-hints/#implementation-kube-proxy).

Reviewer 4: With the previous wording, I was expecting to find it in a section following in the same document.

```suggestion
With the `TopologyAwareRouting` feature, kube-proxy filters the endpoints it routes to based on the hints in the EndpointSlice resource. In most of the cases, kube-proxy will prefer the endpoint(s) in the same zone. For more details, see the [kubernetes documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/topology-aware-hints/#implementation-kube-proxy).
```

> ## Topology-aware Services in the Seed cluster

Reviewer 2: What do you think about handling hints for every service in a multi-zone control plane? For some it wouldn't be relevant but at least it makes the entire handling easier and we wouldn't miss a service.

Author: In the current revision of the PR, hints will be added to only if the feature gate is enabled and the Shoot is HA with failure tolerance type `zone`. A question that is related: I was also not sure how the extensions will make a Service topology-aware. The provider extensions can make the `csi-snapshot-validation` Service topology-aware. I was not sure how to handle this. One option is to add the label and annotation directly - this would mean that the Service could have hints when the gardenlet feature is disabled. Other option is to try to duplicate the "gate" logic in the extensions - the "gate" logic is the feature gate is enabled and the control plane is HA with type `zone`. This options looks like an overkill.
I am mentioning all of this because if we decide to make each Service in Shoot control plane the topology-aware, then we would also tackle this problem with how to make Services topology-aware outside of gardenlet.

---

With regards to the "feature gate" - I put the feature behind a feature gate because we wanted to have the control when the enable/disable the functionality. But in the longterm I think we will want to preserve this behaviour and I rather see that the feature gate can be transformed to a config option (similar to what happened with the Logging feature gate).

---

With regards to your question - I assume it should work. It should be able to fallback to the default behaviour when there is no endpoint in the given zone.
So what is the suggestion? Another webhook in GRM that makes all Services for HA Shoot with `zone` topology-aware?

Reviewer: > So what is the suggestion? Another webhook in GRM that makes all Services for HA Shoot with zone topology-aware?

Isn't this the easier option? We were wondering why we are differentiating here and having custom code for a few services only. For `zone` shoots, wouldn't it simplify things if we make all services topology-aware? If you don't see issues/risks with this, then let's probably go for it. It's still all hidden behind the feature gate, so if it unexpectedly doesn't work we can change the approach?

Author: > Isn't this the easier option? We were wondering why we are differentiating here and having custom code for a few services only.

I started initially with this approach because in the description of https://github.com/gardener/gardener/issues/6718 as substasks were listed the Services that need to adapted - `etcd-{main,events}-client`, `kube-apiserver`, `gardener-resource-manager`, `vpa-webhook`.
I don't know which is the easier option. If we decide on the webhook approach, how would we handle the garden cluster? Do I need to still preserve the existing logic in the kube-apiserver, etcd and GRM webhooks as I assume the gardener-operator is reusing these components?
Additionally, there is a case where components are running outside of the Shoot control plane in the Seed. In the early days I sketched that the provider-extension Pods in the Seed can be also topology-aware:
```
##### Extensions with a Shoot webhook (gardener-extension-provider-aws, gardener-extension-provider-alicloud, gardener-extension-provider-vsphere, gardener-extension-networking-cilium)

Some extensions like gardener-extension-provider-aws and gardener-extension-provider-alicloud serve Shoot webhooks. The provider-aws Shoot webhook mutates the `addons-nginx-ingress-controller` ConfigMap. provider-alicloud mutates the `vpn-shoot` and `addons-nginx-ingress-controller` Services and the `metrics-server` Deployment. networking-cilium mutates the `node-local-dns` DaemonSet and ConfigMap. provider-vsphere mutates the `metrics-server` Deployment.
```

Which are the other Services in HA control plane type zone that can benefit from such thing? I see Services for controllers (`cert-controller-manager`, `cloud-controller-manager`, `cluster-autoscaler`, `kube-controller-manager`, `kube-scheduler`, `machine-controller-manager`) where the controllers run 2 replicas. I think only prometheus is calling these Services. I don't know how prometheus is working internally - whether it calls the Service or whether it directly fetching metrics from the Pods. I can try to clarify with the monitoring colleagues whether prometheus could benefit from controller Services being topology-aware.
Pods backing Services `grafana-operators`, `grafana-users`, `kube-state-metrics`, `loki`, `prometheus-web`, `vpn-seed-server-0`, `vpn-seed-server-1` run with 1 replica, hence they cannot benefit from topology-aware routing. The single running replica will be always called.
With this PR we already tackle (`kube-apiserver`, `etcd-{main,events}-client`, `gardener-resource-manager`, `vpa-webhook`) and we have plans to tackle `csi-snapshot-validation` in the extensions.
I don't know who is consuming Serivces `etcd-{main,events}-peer` and whether they can benefit from being topology aware. I can try to clarify with the etcd colleagues whether this peer Service can benefit from topology aware routing.

```
NAME                         TYPE        CLUSTER-IP       EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)                       AGE
cert-controller-manager      ClusterIP   None             <none>        10258/TCP                     91d
cloud-controller-manager     ClusterIP   None             <none>        10258/TCP                     91d
cluster-autoscaler           ClusterIP   None             <none>        8085/TCP                      91d
csi-snapshot-validation      ClusterIP   10.243.219.255   <none>        443/TCP                       91d
etcd-events-client           ClusterIP   10.243.224.57    <none>        2379/TCP,2380/TCP,8080/TCP    91d
etcd-events-peer             ClusterIP   None             <none>        2380/TCP                      91d
etcd-main-client             ClusterIP   10.243.106.101   <none>        2379/TCP,2380/TCP,8080/TCP    91d
etcd-main-peer               ClusterIP   None             <none>        2380/TCP                      91d
gardener-resource-manager    ClusterIP   10.243.142.119   <none>        8080/TCP,8081/TCP,443/TCP     91d
grafana-operators            ClusterIP   10.243.171.181   <none>        3000/TCP                      91d
grafana-users                ClusterIP   10.243.175.244   <none>        3000/TCP                      91d
kube-apiserver               ClusterIP   10.243.60.15     <none>        443/TCP                       91d
kube-controller-manager      ClusterIP   None             <none>        10257/TCP                     91d
kube-scheduler               ClusterIP   10.243.71.38     <none>        10259/TCP                     91d
kube-state-metrics           ClusterIP   10.243.165.190   <none>        80/TCP                        91d
loki                         ClusterIP   10.243.247.97    <none>        3100/TCP,8080/TCP,9273/TCP    91d
machine-controller-manager   ClusterIP   None             <none>        10258/TCP                     91d
prometheus-web               ClusterIP   10.243.7.28      <none>        80/TCP                        91d
vpa-webhook                  ClusterIP   10.243.7.166     <none>        443/TCP                       91d
vpn-seed-server-0            ClusterIP   10.243.62.162    <none>        1194/TCP,9443/TCP,15000/TCP   51d
vpn-seed-server-1            ClusterIP   10.243.55.44     <none>        1194/TCP,9443/TCP,15000/TCP   51d
```

Feel free to comment if a missed a Service that can be topology-aware.

In summary if `kube-apiserver`, `etcd-{main,events}-client`, `gardener-resource-manager`, `vpa-webhook` are the only Services that we need to be topology-aware and if I have to preserve the logic in the components for the gardener-operator, do we benefit from the webhook approach?
For webhooks, we also had a discussion in the past. IMO in some cases it is cheaper to do the changes in the components/charts explicitly than introducing yet another webhook that does the mutation over the network.

PS. I am just trying to figure out which is the better approach to prevent going back and forth.

Reviewer 4: From my perspective, the webhook approach has the clear advantage that new services are directly covered. Hence, we do not need to keep yet another topic in mind when extending gardener.
On the downside, the webhook approach increases the load on `kupe-apiserver` due to additional calls and also to a small extent `etcd` due to the added hints. Personally, I do not think that these downsides are stronger argument than the reduction in cognitive load caused by yet another topic to keep in mind when creating new services.
WDYT?

Author: In https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/7191#discussion_r1094546811 I shared the following concerns that are not answered in your reply:
- how to tackle the garden cluster with the webhook approach?
- how to tackle Seed components running outside of the Shoot control plane with the webhook approach?

Reviewer 4: As my question in https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/7191#discussion_r1090693277 indicates, I do not see a serious downside in enabling this for all services. The additional metadata in the endpoints should be negligible. However, it would bring a uniform approach and let everyone focus on other topics.
Therefore, I would globally enable it for seed services. I also do not see any reason why not to activate it in the garden cluster. It should not cause any harm, but can do some good.
That being said I do not know if the `gardener-resource-manager` is deployed in the garden or not. If it is not deployed I understand your hesitation to use the same approach in the garden. Nevertheless, from a conceptual point of view I do not see any reason why to handle the garden different from the seed with respect to topology-aware routing, i.e. I propose to enable it for both unconditionally unless anyone can think of good reasons why not to.

Author: We had a sync last week and agreed on the consensus to put the TopologyAwareRouting functionality behind a Seed setting. The motivation for a Seed setting comes from the fact that this approach will allow extensions to make their components topology-aware (for example by reading the Seed spec from the Cluster resource and checking if topologyAwareRouting is enabled for the Seed).
The webhook approach has the benefit that there is no need to cover each and every Service. But it has the following uncertainties: it can potentially cause issue if a Service does not need to be topology-aware; it is not optimal performance-wise (the mutation happens over the network; yet another failure point).

##### etcd-main-client and etcd-events-client

The `etcd-main-client` and `etcd-events-client` Services are topology-aware. They are consumed by the kube-apiserver.

##### kube-apiserver

The `kube-apiserver` Service is topology-aware. It is consumed by the controllers running in the Shoot control plane.

##### gardener-resource-manager

The `gardener-resource-manager` Service that is part of the Shoot control plane is topology-aware. The resource-manager serves webhooks and the Service is consumed by the kube-apiserver for the webhook communication.

##### vpa-webhook

The `vpa-webhook` Service that is part of the Shoot control plane is topology-aware. It is consumed by the kube-apiserver for the webhook communication.

## Topology-aware Services in the Garden cluster

TBD

> ## How to make a Service topology-aware?

Reviewer 4: From my perspective, it would help if this section would be moved up before section "Topology-aware Services in the Seed cluster".
I was wondering how some services can be topology-aware if I do not even know how it is done.

To make a Service topology-aware, the following annotation and label has to be added to the Service:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  annotations:
    service.kubernetes.io/topology-aware-hints: "auto"
  labels:
    endpoint-slice-hints.resources.gardener.cloud/consider: "true"
```

The `service.kubernetes.io/topology-aware-hints=auto` annotation is needed for kube-proxy. One of the prerequisites on kube-proxy side for using topology-aware routing is the corresponding Service to be annotated with the `service.kubernetes.io/topology-aware-hints=auto`. For more details, see the following [kube-proxy function](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/b46a3f887ca979b1a5d14fd39cb1af43e7e5d12d/pkg/proxy/topology.go#L140-L186).
The `endpoint-slice-hints.resources.gardener.cloud/consider=true` label is needed for gardener-resource-manager to prevent the EndpointSlice hints mutating webhook from selecting all EndpointSlice resources but only the ones that are labeled with the consider label.

> The Gardener extensions can use this approach to make a Service they deploy topology-aware.

Reviewer 2: Can you add `/docs/extensions/conventions.md` here?

> The Gardener extensions can use this approach to make a Service they deploy topology-aware.

Reviewer 4: Is there any reason why a service should not be made topology-aware?
I do not see any issue in starting with a focussed approach based on the important services. However, identifying all relevant services is quite an effort. Therefore, I would be interested in your thoughts about generally enabling it (at some later point)?

Author: The topic is being discussed in https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/7191#discussion_r1085032036.

Reviewer 4: Fair point. Let's discuss it there.

## How to enable the `TopologyAwareRouting` feature gate?

The `TopologyAwareRouting` feature gate can be enabled in the component config of the corresponding component. For gardenlet:

```yaml
apiVersion: gardenlet.config.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: GardenletConfiguration
# ...
featureGates:
  TopologyAwareRouting: true
```

For the gardener-operator:
```yaml
apiVersion: operator.config.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: OperatorConfiguration
# ...
featureGates:
  TopologyAwareRouting: true
```

> For K8s < 1.24 clusters, the `TopologyAwareRouting` feature gate requires the Kubernetes `TopologyAwareHints` feature gate to be enabled for kube-apiserver, kube-controller-manager and kube-proxy. This is required because the `TopologyAwareHints` feature gate is disabled by default in K8s < 1.24. When `TopologyAwareHints` is disabled the kube-apiserver does not allow anything to be persisted in the `.endpoints[].hints` field in the EndpointSlice resource, the kube-controller-manager removes the hints and kube-proxy is not using topology-aware routing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
⚠️ For K8s < 1.24 clusters, the `TopologyAwareRouting` feature gate requires the Kubernetes `TopologyAwareHints` feature gate to be enabled for kube-apiserver, kube-controller-manager and kube-proxy. This is required because the `TopologyAwareHints` feature gate is disabled by default in K8s < 1.24. When `TopologyAwareHints` is disabled the kube-apiserver does not allow anything to be persisted in the `.endpoints[].hints` field in the EndpointSlice resource, the kube-controller-manager removes the hints and kube-proxy is not using topology-aware routing.
```

You can probably also move this section more to the top because it's such an important information.
